[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> Too often we are
too sick, too tired,
and too addicted to live
our lives as we ought to.
Millions of Americans
struggle with toxicity
addiction and
chemical dependency.
We spend millions of
dollars every year
from smoking
cessation medications
to weight loss programs.
But what if the key to wellness
was natural, inexpensive,
and available in
your own backyard?
Today, we will hear
from Brigitte Mars.
Brigitte is a master herbalist
and nutritional consultant
of natural health with
50 years of experience.
She teaches herbal medicine
at Naropa University
and the School of Health
Mastery in Iceland.
Welcome, Brigitte,
to "Healing Matrix."
>> It's my pleasure and honor.
Thank you, Dr. Sue.
>> Can you tell us just a
little bit about your story?
How did you become an herbalist?
What got you here?
>> Well, I have to say it was my
French Canadian grandmother who
inspired me.
She didn't call
herself an herbalist,
but she was so wise and used
all these folk remedies, which
I loved, that folk remedies
were medicine for the people.
And by the time I
was in high school,
I was just turning all my
class papers and projects
into a way of learning
more about plant medicine.
I lived for two and
1/2 years and ate
nothing but wild edible plants.
I've had many teachers
along the way--
Michael Tierra,
Christopher Hobbs.
I went to massage
school, went to college.
But really it was doing
it and finding out
that these time-tested
remedies that
had been used by millions of
people for thousands of years
really work.
>> And grandma.
[LAUGHTER]
Bringing it home, absolutely.
So who guided your
practice, specifically,
while you were
studying herbalism?
>> I have had so many
teachers along the way.
But it's always
been this dedication
that while I'm here
on this planet,
I want to do my best to
make a positive difference.
And if I can help educate people
to learn to eat the dandelions
and use them as medicine rather
than spraying pesticides,
I'm doing my job.
>> So today, we're going
to speak about cravings,
dependencies,
addictions, et cetera.
When did you first
notice the need
to offer these natural
solutions for these challenges?
>> I see that a lot
of people struggle.
So I think even at a young
age, even with my own family,
it was going to the
doctors and antibiotics.
And as a teenager,
I suffered from acne
and went from one
doctor to the next.
And it was really taking
charge of my own health
rather than expecting
somebody else
to fix it that I was
able to clarify things.
So it's a work in progress.
This is a subject we can
study our whole lives.
And what a great joy, because
we can not only help ourselves,
help our health, but do
good for the planet as well.
Because somewhere, there's
going to be fields of lavender
and echinacea growing.
>> When you started working with
this and this greater awareness
to how to approach these things,
what did you start to notice
about your clients?
>> Well, I know that
there's a lot of people,
they want to get healthy.
They want to do it naturally.
But very often
there's some addiction
that's standing in the way.
It's one thing to say, I want
to get my blood pressure down,
or I want to help my
skin be more radiant.
But if we're still addicted
to sugar, coffee, smoking,
that is going to have an effect.
And that's going to
get in the way of all
the herbs, and vitamins,
and health foods
that we could possibly eat.
So I realized early on,
probably even in the '70s,
that we needed to
look at, perhaps
there was something in the
way that was keeping us
from having optimal health.
>> So detoxification before
we're trying new remedies is
essential to really get the
benefit of the new remedies
that we're trying to
approach, that we detoxify.
So in that detoxification
approach, what role
does pH play, alkalizing the
body, acidifying circumstances?
What is it that happens there
with acid-alkaline balance?
>> Well, it's been found that
when we're in a more acid
state, which comes from eating
sugar, grains, coffee, alcohol,
that we're going to crave
more of those foods.
And the American diet is
more on the acid side.
If we want to get more
alkaline, it's really simple.
Start eating more
green, leafy vegetables.
I like to remind people
that at least one meal a day
should be a salad.
And don't limit green,
leafy vegetables just
to leafy things, but
think about broccoli,
and cucumbers, and arugula.
So the greens are
very alkalinizing.
And I really feel
that sugar addiction
is at the roots of many
of the other addictions.
We're a culture that's very
big on stimulating ourselves--
a cup of coffee,
sugar, soda, chocolate.
And then we have
to sedate ourselves
so we can sleep at night.
So it becomes this
roller coaster ride
of stimulate, sedate.
And so getting more
alkaline is going
to not only help
our physical health,
but also help our
mental well-being
so we feel in a more
peaceful and calm state,
and not craving things so much.
>> What else acidifies the body?
What foods in
particular might people
be aware of that,
hey, I could opt
just not to do that because it's
more acidifying to my system
than it's worth?
>> Well, grains can be very
acidifying, nuts, meat, dairy.
And it's not to say
that those foods can't
be in a person's diet.
It's just that the diet tends
to be way overly acidic.
And so you can get
little pH test strips
and test your urine in
them throughout the day
and just see where are you at.
Are you in a state of balance?
And there's many,
many books written
on the importance of this.
But sometimes we might
even crave a substance
that we're allergic to.
And it could be a food thing.
It could be, but I love
dairy, or I love gluten,
or I love soy
foods or something.
And it may be that we're eating
those foods because we're
stimulating an immune response
by activating white blood
cells.
We actually feel
a little comforted
because we've
eaten those things.
And it's possible that
those grains, for example,
could be in alcohol.
Maybe we're craving the
wheat, or the yeast,
or the sugar that's in
alcoholic beverages.
And back to the sugar
for a minute, the effects
of eating sugar, we know that
sugar elevates our blood sugar
level.
And then when the
levels drop, we
feel like we need to
redose with sugar.
But the effects
of sugar are very
much like the effects of
drinking coffee or doing
cocaine, for example.
We're always playing
with our blood sugar.
>> How can someone start
to self-monitor the amount
of acidifying foods that
we've named that they do want
to consume?
How do they know, in
proportion to the amount
of alkalizing fruits,
and vegetables,
and these green leafies
that we're talking about--
is there a way that
they could just
have an eyeshot view of
saying, yes, I'm on track?
>> Well, I think testing with
pH test strips would be one way.
And to be honest, I
don't measure or count.
I just really make a concerted
effort to eat more greens,
eat colorful, fresh
fruits and vegetables,
to eat lower on the food chain.
But I've heard the
statistics about 80%
on the more alkaline range and
maybe 20% on the acid range.
But personally, I'm
just really going
to make an effort for
color and not only
to eat a wide variety
of color, but to eat
a wide variety of flavor.
Because the American
diet seems to be very
fixated on sweet and salty.
So I'd also like to
suggest, what about sour?
What about bitter?
What about pungent?
>> It's very interesting because
there are research programs
that have shown that covering
a wide variety of flavors curbs
cravings in a tremendous way.
And it's actually beneficial
to coming off of addiction.
Do you have any common--
>> Well, a really great thing
is I think a lot of addictive
tendencies have their
roots in a liver imbalance.
So the age-old tradition
of starting your day
with a cup of warm water and
the juice of half a lemon in it
is a great way to begin the
day because the sour flavor
activates the liver.
But here in America
we have a saying,
if life gives you
lemons, get the tequila.
[LAUGHTER]
>> No, just eat the lemons.
>> And we also know that a
little bit of the bitter flavor
can dispel a craving for sweets.
So the few things that we
do have that are bitter,
maybe chocolate or coffee,
by the time people eat them
they tend to have
high fructose corn
syrup added to them or
sugar, even dark chocolate,
which is bitter.
We want to curb the
sugar in our diets
because that's
making us too acidic.
>> Is there a pH that
one should look for?
Let's say they go buy the pH
test strips at their pharmacy
or testing in whatever
way they can find,
the litmus paper to do so.
Is there a number
they should look for,
knowing that, OK, I'm
in the right range here
that will allow me to
make the changes that I
want to make successfully?
>> It's actually a really small
range between six and seven.
>> So no matter what they ate
the day before or whatever,
their urine pH, six or seven
the next day, the next morning,
should be an indicator for them
to proceed with success in mind
that they can--
>> And it is also not unusual
to be a little more acidic
in the morning because we
generally are not drinking
liquids as much
during the night.
So things might be
more concentrated.
But again, these tests are
going to change day to day, meal
to meal.
And it's just a barometer.
So I don't think it
has to be complicated.
I think it's just good sense.
>> So if someone is going to
begin a detox program before
trying to move into something,
why is that the effective way
to approach, let's
say, addiction,
coming off of addiction?
What's the role there
between detox, change,
dropping out of an
addictive pattern?
>> Well, as long as we are
continuing to do something
that's undermining our health,
it's going to be not fruitful
to get the results that we want.
So the first thing we need to do
is really look inside and see,
what is it that's
getting in the way?
And again, it's going to be
different for different people.
Some people do OK.
They don't want to take
that cup of coffee away,
or they feel that they
don't drink excessively.
But it's really up
to the individual
to say, how is
this affecting me?
I think that there's
some conditions where
any consumption of
caffeine or alcohol,
certainly if someone's had
a history of alcoholism
and they're cutting
it out of their life,
no amount would be
more acceptable.
Sugar, it's hard to avoid that
all together because it's still
hidden in so many things.
So it really depends
on the person
and what is the impediment.
But people not only are
addicted to food substances.
People can be addicted to
behaviors like Facebook
or video games, for example.
So we just want to look at what
these habits might be and maybe
really make a contract
with ourselves
to say, how is this serving me?
Is this getting in the way?
And I'm really big
on people journaling.
And so some journal
topics might be,
what are the reasons
why I want to stop,
even looking at what
it's costing me.
And we have to keep in mind that
a lot of addictions are legal.
They're not all illegal things.
And also, it's been defined
that an addiction is something
that we have to have before
we can get on with our life.
So to really look at it--
what is this costing me?
Is this affecting my sexuality?
Is it affecting sleep?
Those are always signs
that it's creating
an imbalance in the body.
But we could look
at an addiction--
how is smoking affecting me?
Am I coughing all the time?
Is it yellowing my teeth?
Is it making me
unpleasant to be around?
Does my partner say I
smell like an ashtray?
And then what is the
cost of every cigarette?
And what are those
tax dollars going to?
And do I want to be
supporting companies
that are spraying
pesticides and not
caring about the environment?
So we really want
to go deep about,
do I want to be
enslaved by this,
or do I want to be free of
something that's enslaving me?
>> Love myself a
little bit more,
make different choices that
are self-affirming instead
of continuing to escape into
something that's really sucking
the life out of me in
one form or another.
It's so important that
we do this evaluation.
I think that's a really
wonderful suggestion
that you're making, that
someone take the time to start
journaling so that we
can see it out in print
and really take the time to
be present with ourselves
in such a way.
It's a beautiful
component, I think,
to someone overcoming
addiction, which is just
a runaway train of sorts.
Yes.
>> And I do believe that
we need rewards in life.
So what are other ways
we can reward ourselves?
So let's say you've
had a hard day.
You've worked hard.
For me, I know taking
an aromatherapy bath
might be a reward, or calling
a friend long distance,
or reading a magazine,
or reading a novel,
going for a walk, doing
yoga, working in the garden.
And a really big thing for
me is something that's not
as prevalent in our culture.
If we look at our
ancestors, when
they got together
socially, they were often
doing things with their hands.
Maybe they were
talking, but they
might have been woodworking,
or sketching, or knitting,
or crocheting, or
doing metal crafting.
And I would really
like to bring that back
because I think a lot of the
energy that goes into always
having to be doing something, if
we could be creating something
of beauty that improves
our self-esteem,
that that could also
help to liberate us.
And I think that there's also
this real powerful magic that
happens with this hand
and brain connection
when we focus just enough
to say, knit one, purl two.
And I think that needs to
come back into our culture.
Because if we don't utilize our
hands and our brain that way,
I also think that
can make us less
likely to have clear mental
faculties as we get older.
>> Yes.
It seems so simple.
It's actually so
simple, the mind.
We never think of it.
And yet, it has
such a deep value
in bringing us back into
our humanity and presence
to ourself, which is where all
healing comes from ultimately.
We have to land,
reconnect, and allow
this beautiful,
miraculous system
to do what it's built to do.
But we can't do that if we're
so busy outrunning something
that it just stops
everything in its tracks.
So let's talk specifics
about detoxing, and starting
to get a chemistry, and
shifting the reality
into a new direction.
We're coming home to ourselves.
We're going to journal
on some things.
We're going to get our hands
in the soil maybe and garden.
And we're going to
do these things.
And we're also going
to approach a detox.
Are there specific
herbs that help
in the detox of the liver,
which is bearing the brunt of so
much of what we're describing?
>> Well, one of my favorite
herbs is the dandelion.
And actually, dandelion
grows everywhere.
Maybe it's growing
everywhere for a reason,
saying use me lots.
I'm here.
>> So it's medicine, this
thing's that's irritating
everyone in their lawn.
They're having to dig it out.
>> And are we are
addicted to pesticides,
because that's killing the bees.
But dandelion leaves
are very alkalinizing.
You can make salad with them.
The dandelion root in
particular is really
good for detoxifying the liver.
There's other common herbs--
burdock root, yellow dock root.
Those are some of
the herbs I like
to use in the detox process.
And they can be made into a tea.
So it's very simple.
You could brew up a quart
of tea the night before,
let it sit overnight, and
then drink a quart of it
the next day.
You're going to get minerals.
Dandelions are not the enemy.
They actually aerate the soil.
And so we really need to
give this plant the accolades
that it deserves.
>> Yes.
So this message overall
is relax, exhale,
utilize your environment,
engage with life again,
drop in to nature,
and allow nature
to serve you as she's trying to.
But we're so busy up here in our
heads and living in another way
that we've just lost touch
with this overall vibration
of allowing nature to
nurture in this way.
>> And you mentioned
exhale, inhale, breathe.
We can feed our
brains oxygen. And I
think very often we're
drawn to, I need something.
I need this.
I need that.
And a real simple method--
I'm a writer.
I've written 14 books.
And writers are notorious
substance abusers.
And I might sit there at
my desk and say, yeah,
I really want more yerba
mate, but then I might just--
[INHALING] take some deep
inhalations of essential oils.
It's a way of shifting
your frequency.
Maybe you're going down the I'm
freaking out neural pathway,
and you take some
deep inhalations,
and it can calm you down.
This is cardamom,
which I like, which
is great for coffee
addiction in particular.
But lavender is one
that's so multipurposeful.
So rather than going down,
I'm so tired, I'm so anxious,
whatever the emotion might be,
you start smelling something
and it affects our hindbrain.
And lavender lane is a lot
nicer than freak out highway.
>> Yeah.
I'll be right with you.
>> [LAUGHING] Really simple.
>> [LAUGHING] That's beautiful.
>> And I think that carrying
around some essential oils is
a great way of
shifting consciousness.
And because there's
often such a connection
between a craving for
sweets, whether it
be we want coffee or chocolate,
smelling some naturally sweet
essential oils like
fennel or anise
can give our brains a sensation
of, I'm having something sweet,
without imbibing any calories.
>> Yeah.
We know that we
are energy beings,
that everything is energy.
And when we bring
the consciousness
of these vibrations
of fennel or what
we might choose instead of
reaching for the actual sweet,
it impacts us on this
energy body level,
on the subtle level.
And the impact is there
without shoving something
in our mouth to try to create
a chemical on a physical level.
We can preempt it is basically
what you're saying, yes?
>> Yes.
And even deep breathing,
things that get us to breathe--
yoga, qigong, tai
chi, meditation--
I mean, that's one
of the principles
of many different practices
that calm our mind and body.
>> Definitely a big
part of my life.
And I could not
live the life that I
live if I wasn't implementing
these kinds of practices.
So I so appreciate that
you're out there in the world,
teaching people how to do this.
I want to come right
back into detoxing
because I know that it's
a big word for people.
People are trying to detox, and
they're trying to do it safely,
or they're trying to figure
out what's effective.
In regarding herbalism, what
creates an effective detoxing
agent?
What is it?
What's the criteria
there that you would say,
well, it's got to do this,
or it's got to have this,
or it's got to access
this aspect of our system?
>> Well, there's
so many detoxes,
and there's so many products
you can buy that are ready-made
that can be helpful.
And I would say
that a lot of them
are going to have some
laxative herbs in there.
Because if you eliminate
through the colon,
that's one method of detoxing.
So they might have herbs in them
like flaxseed or psyllium seed.
Many of them are
going to have herbs
that help to cleanse the
kidneys by being diuretic.
So you might find herbs like
dandelion leaf or nettle.
You might find herbs that
are going to be diaphoretic,
that maybe make
you sweat as well,
could be something like
peppermint or yarrow.
So you can drink
these herbs as teas.
Some of them are
available in capsules.
And if you do that, you would
want to drink a lot more water.
But we also should
be thinking about,
are we drinking pure
water, spring water,
distilled water, water
that's hopefully not
in plastic bottles?
We really want to do what we can
to improve the quality of water
that we're drinking.
And then Epsom salt baths
can be a wonderful thing
to do during a detox.
If you live somewhere where
you have access to a sauna
or you can go to
hot springs, that
can be part of
the detox process.
A dry brush skin massaging
is a great method
of helping to loosen
dead skin cells
and improve lymphatic flow.
This might also be a time
that you want to get massage.
But I also think we need to
do it body, mind, and spirit.
So making a resolution
of, why do I want to quit?
What am I willing
to do about it?
And sometimes we need to
give ourselves a little time,
like, I want to be
done by this addiction
perhaps 30 days from now.
It might not happen
tomorrow, but we're
in the process of doing
less, and less, and less.
So that by whatever it is,
the first day of summer,
or the first day of the
new year, or whatever,
that we're on a better track.
And then maybe we get rid of
the paraphernalia associated
with it.
>> Do you ascribe to building
up the system in these positive
ways of alkalizing the system,
et cetera before we even
attempt to try to take away the
things that we're addicted to?
Is that, in your experience,
more helpful for people?
>> Well, I think that a lot of
people, they want relief now.
So I don't think that
we have to separate it,
that you could be
getting more alkaline,
and detoxing, and
cleaning your house.
I guess I'm a multitasker or
maybe because I'm a bit older.
So there's a lot to do here.
And I want to help people.
And maybe I have their attention
while they're reading the book
or they're a client of mine.
So I'm going to try to make
it as simple as possible
and cheer people on,
like, you can do this.
And all right, how different
can your life be in a month?
>> I know that herbalism is
this idea that we're reaching
into nature, and we're
connecting with nature.
We're consuming nature and
its medicinal properties
as an attempt to
be more holistic,
to open up again and not be
so isolated as a separate self
that's having to survive,
but that we allow
really nature to be on our side,
and that we belong in that way.
And one of the
concepts in this is
the idea of adaptogens and
things that bring harmony.
Can you speak about
what that is and how
it plays a role in what
you're doing with people?
>> Well, the word "adaptogen"
indicates that there's a whole
classification of plants--
and we could even say foods--
that help our bodies
acclimate to stress.
So one of the beautiful
things about adaptogens
is they can give you more
energy if you need more energy,
but they can also help calm you
down if that's what you need.
And a lot of the
adaptogenic herbs,
I think of things like
eleuthero, which used
to be called Siberian ginseng.
I think of ashwagandha,
of schisandra berries.
I think of rhodiola.
A lot of these herbs grow under
very difficult conditions,
that the plants
themselves have had
to adapt to adversity,
like growing in Siberia
or growing on a cliff in
Iceland with the waves smashing
against--
like rhodiola that
I've collected there.
And I think that when we
imbibe these plants that
have to adapt, that it's
going to help us acclimate.
But I also think that the
dandelion is an adaptogen
because they try so many
ways to eradicate it,
and it still comes back.
>> You're not getting rid of me.
>> There's a lot of qi in there.
And another thing
that I love about--
when I make a salad, I'm
often harvesting those plants
five minutes before
we're consuming them
at the dinner table.
And the amount of energy
you get from those plants,
it's unsurpassed.
You can't buy that at the
store when the kale was picked
six weeks ago in another state.
>> The enzymatic activity,
the vital force is there.
>> Yes.
>> You're consuming that.
It's becoming part of your
system because of this, yes?
>> Yes.
>> Beautiful.
So what then is the
relationship between adaptogens
and addiction?
How does it directly benefit
our attempt to change?
>> Well, a lot of the adaptogens
have a special affinity
for nourishing the
adrenal glands.
So if we have long been using
some substance, whether it
be coffee, or alcohol, or sugar,
and cocaine on, and on, and on,
our adrenal glands
get very exhausted.
And again, I think
a lot of people
have exhausted adrenal
glands anyways.
But we know that these
adaptogens nourish our energy
level.
They support us.
And they might give us
more energy during the day,
but they could also help us
to have better sleep at night
and stay asleep.
And so when we start our day
with a cup of coffee, which
is totally legal
and all American,
you're actually stimulating
adrenaline production.
And adrenaline is that
flight or fight hormone
that we're supposed to
be producing when we're
in an emergency situation,
when the baby's trapped
under the car.
And yet, we start our days
like that all the time.
>> Every day, baby under the
car every day before 9 o'clock.
>> Yeah.
[LAUGHTER]
And it might not
get any better when
we start loading sugar
and soft drinks onto that.
>> So then we reach for
things because it's exhausting
to our system to constantly
be in this fight or flight.
Then we reach for things that
are a false sense of energy.
And sugar has been one
of our favorite flavors
of that process.
As we know, art imitates life.
And there's a film Brigitte
has mentioned in her class that
poignantly illustrates the
relationship between addiction
and blood sugar levels.
Let's take a look at a 1955
film, "Man With a Golden Arm."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It's the most
gorgeous day I ever saw.
I think it's the
first day I ever saw.
I got a craving for
something sweet.
You got anything sweet?
>> Sugar?
>> Give me.
More.
Come on.
>> Ooh, how can you?
Oh, Frankie.
>> Oh, I never felt
as good in my life.
>> [LAUGHING] What
are we seeing here?
>> We're seeing the people go
from one addiction to the next.
>> Yes.
>> And if you've ever
been to an AA meeting,
very often people
get off alcohol,
and then it's totally accepted
to drink lots of coffee
and even smoke cigarettes.
Even when people go
to rehab, they often
come away with other addictions.
And there might be a whole
potluck of lots of sugary foods
to eat too.
So as long as we stay
in the sugar loop,
we might be going from
one addiction to the next.
>> Yes.
>> My son-in-law likes to call
sugar legal drugs for kids.
>> Yes.
Well, great.
Get them off to a fast,
early start, yeah.
So what is specifically
that relationship
between blood sugar
levels and addiction?
>> Well, I think we have to
start looking at that sugar
itself has become a drug,
because sugar is in the same
family as wheat, barley.
It's in the grass family,
corn, unless we're
getting sugar beets.
But in any case, wherever
the sugar comes from,
it is refined.
We take this mineral
rich substance,
for example, sugar
cane, we remove
all the nutrients from it, which
is where the molasses comes in.
Molasses is full of
B vitamins and iron.
And then what we're left with
is a white, crystalline powder.
So we are turning
a food that could
be nourishing into a drug.
And salt, the other predominant
flavor in our culture,
most salt is heated to
about 1,400 degrees,
the minerals removed
from it, and then
sold to the vitamin companies.
So our salt and our
sugar have become
like drugs that don't
ever really satisfy us.
So it would be wiser to get
the sweet flavor, which,
of course, is our birthright
because mother's milk is sweet,
but to look to eating
things that are nurturing,
that are what they call in
Asian medicine full sweet,
so things like sweet potatoes,
or winter squash, or pumpkin,
or parsnips.
So you're getting
the sweet flavor,
but you're also getting
fiber, and minerals,
and beta carotene, and
all that good stuff too.
>> From a whole, complete food--
>> Yes.
>> --rather than just a partial,
empty version of it that is
stimulatory to the body.
>> Because when we
refine a substance,
it has more potential
for addiction.
So after the Civil War, there
were thousands of Americans
that were addicted to morphine.
But then heroin was
invented to be a remedy
for morphine addiction.
And that turned out to
be even more addicting.
>> [LAUGHING]
>> And the morphine
was derived from opium.
So opium is addicting, but
morphine is more addicting.
So the more you
refine a substance--
we could say the same
things about coca leaves.
Coca leaves are chewed by
people of South America.
>> Yeah, the Indians.
>> Yes.
It helps with altitude--
>> Sure.
>> --sickness and hunger.
But when you refine it into
a crystalline white powder,
that's where the
addiction sets in
because you don't have
anything to balance it.
There's no chlorophyll, or
vitamins, or protein in it
any longer.
>> So the system is
reeling out of control,
trying to find some
kind of balance,
and then becomes addictive
in attempt to satiate that.
>> And you can't patent a plant.
So there's always
been this thing
about, well, let's refine it.
Let's make it simpler.
And so when you make
something even easier to use,
because it's ready to go,
it becomes easier to abuse.
So it's a lot easier to drink a
little bit of vodka than drink
three beers because
it's more concentrated.
>> [LAUGHING] Get
the same effect.
>> The hypodermic needle, the
first recorded drug addict,
needle user was the
wife of the man,
the doctor who had invented
the hypodermic needle.
She was a morphine addict.
So the more easy we make
it-- pre-rolled cigarettes
are a lot easier to overuse than
when you have to roll your own
and go sit outside
on the snowy porch,
and it goes out 10 times.
So pre-rolled cigarettes
that have chemicals
added to make them continue to
be lit rather than going out,
it's a lot easier to abuse that.
>> Let's come back to your
herbs for just a moment--
specific herbs to help
regulate blood sugar?
>> Well, I think of
fennel and anise,
but cinnamon is
one of my favorite.
Cinnamon is naturally sweet.
It is an herb that
improves circulation.
It's a pleasant herb.
So for example, even instead
of adding honey or maple
syrup to some applesauce
that you're making,
you could add cinnamon to it.
We also know that
cinnamon is one
of the premier herbs
for people with diabetes
because it stabilizes
blood sugar.
And it's a flavor that
most people like, safe.
You can smell it.
You can eat it.
You can drink it as a tea.
And I even brought with me
a little cinnamon stick.
Because if someone were trying
to quit smoking cigarettes,
they might inhale
through a cinnamon stick.
It gives you a way
to inhale deeply,
gives you something to hold.
>> And is addressing it from
the energetic perspective all
at the same time.
So what about cravings?
Is there a specific
herb that helps
people just stop the craving,
preempting this whole cycle?
>> Well, I think that
depending on the addiction,
different foods and
different herbs might help.
So for example, a
craving for tobacco--
it might be helpful to use an
herb that has similar chemical
makeup, like the herb lobelia
has an alkaloid in it called
lobeline, which can
satisfy the receptor sites
and yet not be addicting.
It is an herb to use
in very small amounts
because too much of it can have
an emetic quality to it, where
it can make someone throw up.
So it's very small
amounts, about a third
of the strength you
would use other herbs.
Let's say someone
really likes coffee.
It's so prevalent
and so accepted.
But yet, maybe you need
something to get you going.
It may be that you find
yerba mate is kinder
to your adrenals
or green tea, which
has all kinds of anti-cancer
compounds, polyphenols.
But the sugar
craving thing, there
is an herb called
gymnema sylvestre,
and it's an herb that
actually blocks our ability
to taste the sweet flavor.
So that is an herb that can help
people that really think they
need to eat a lot of sweets.
And so if we could
use more cinnamon,
we could smell fennel or anise.
And then another thing,
as we mentioned earlier,
smelling essential
oils that help
to hit some of
those same receptor
sites can also help us to let
go of a habitual behavior.
>> Yeah.
So let's just recap here.
Specifically, if we
could just lay it out,
what role do herbs play
in overcoming addiction?
Just boom.
>> Well, herbs can help so much
because we have herbs that can
stabilize blood sugar, like
fennel, anise, cinnamon.
We have herbs that can help
in the detoxification process.
Because the sooner we can get
these substances that we don't
want any longer
out of our bodies,
the sooner we're
going to be free.
So we have allies like
dandelion, yellow dock, burdock
root.
We have herbs that can give us
a little bit of energy, that
maybe still have some
stimulant in them
like green tea or yerba mate.
And we also have herbs
that are adaptogens
that are going to
nourish our adrenals
and strengthen our willpower,
things like rhodiola,
holy basil, schisandra
berries, and eleuthero.
>> Can you tell us about
the kudzu vine, and alcohol,
and that relationship there?
>> Well, kudzu is an herb that
has a long history of being
used in Chinese medicine as
a remedy for drunkenness.
And there was actually a study--
I'm not big on animal
studies, I want to say.
For me, the herbs
have been tested
by humans for long
enough, but there
was a study done
with hamsters that
were bred to be alcoholics.
And they were
offered three tubes--
a tube of water, a tube of kudzu
flower tea, and then a tube
of alcohol.
And when the kudzu
was available to them,
the amount of alcohol
consumption decreased by 50%.
So that's not a total
giving up drinking,
but for a lot of people
drinking half as much
would probably be better.
>> Yes.
So let's say someone's
drinking, and they're
doing it for
self-medicating purposes,
for its calming effect.
What are specific herbal
alternatives to just completing
this cycle for people?
I just really want
our viewers to know
that if I'm stuck in this
cycle, I'm drinking too much,
and I know it, or I
kind of don't know it,
but now that they're
talking, maybe I am.
And I can't imagine not,
because at the end of the day
I want something to just bring
me back into my body basically
or calm me down.
What could they
reach for instead?
>> Well, there are so many
herbs too that can nourish
the nervous system and help
us to sleep and mellow out.
So I think of the herb
valerian, which is not
what Valium is made from.
That's actually a myth.
It's not true.
Another herb that I
like is kava kava.
However, valerian doesn't
work for everybody.
Some people, it makes
them more stimulated.
But most people find that
it helps them to sleep,
and unwind, and relax.
Kava kava had some negative
press a few years ago
because a European
company was extracting
the kavalactones in
there with chemicals
like hexane and benzene.
But kava kava is an
herb that is used
in ceremony and celebration in
many of the tropical regions
of the planet.
It does make you feel
uber relaxed to the point
that you should not operate
heavy machinery or drive--
>> Yes.
>> --the first few
times you use it.
But kava kava's widely
used in Europe for anxiety.
And I enjoy it.
It's a nice, celebratory thing
to drink with my friends,
and sure is a good night's
sleep, and also very vivid
dreams as well.
>> Interesting.
So it should be handled like
as if someone was drinking
an alcoholic beverage
or something that
is likely to alter them.
So they should approach
this with awareness.
And yet, it has a calming
effect, is healthier for you
by all means.
And tell us about the dreams.
What happens there?
>> Well, dreams can be a way of
processing psychological stuff.
>> Certainly.
>> Well, personally, I will
share that I sleep with
a little sachet of rosemary and
another herb called artemisia.
And smell can really
affect our mental state.
And so you may find yourself
having very vivid dreams
and even be able to remember
them better, because we
underuse this faculty of smell.
But I did want to say, for
people who want milder sedative
herbs, we have things
like chamomile,
and passionflower, and skullcap.
So you don't need to
reinvent the wheel.
You can go to the
health food store
and find somebody
knowledgeable who
can say, this is available in
teas, or tincture, or capsules.
Of course, if someone is
trying to give up alcohol,
they should not use
alcohol tinctures.
But you can find many
of them in capsules
or in a liquid glycerin.
So there are alternatives.
And then there's
also herbs that have
a history of being used to
help people get off alcohol.
Angelica is one of them.
>> High frequency
energy in angelica.
>> Yes.
>> And lifts us up where
alcohol is a suppressant,
so it can pull us up to a
higher vibrational frequency.
And yeah.
I have a great
interest in everything
energetic and what
it is that we can
do to raise our
vibrational frequency
and integrate our energies.
And everything that
you're speaking about
is exactly that, by approaching
it from a holistic standpoint,
allowing the earth to provide
grounding qualities for us
to integrate and to heal.
I want to talk
about a plant that
has been getting a
lot of press recently,
a natural analgesic related
to the coffee plant.
In 2017, the US Department
of Health and Human Services
declared a public
health emergency
to address a national
opioid crisis.
Millions of Americans
misuse prescription
opioids, and millions
of others are
dependent on these medications
because of chronic pain.
Many have turned to a
natural alternative,
a plant called
kratom or "kra-tom."
For some Americans,
this is a miracle herb.
But for the FDA, kratom is just
another addictive substance.
The film, "A Leaf of
Faith," poses the question,
can a plant offer safe,
effective, and organic pain
relief compared to opioids?
Take a look at this documentary.
We'll see.
>> Before I had the stroke, I
was doing about 90 pain pills
a day for seven years.
>> Had about 15 years of my
life go by in a blur of opiates.
>> You could roll me up,
stick me in a garbage bag,
and put me out at the curb, and
that was about all I was good
for.
>> Do I think pharma
made mistakes?
Oh, yes, I do.
But we also know there's
more heroin on the streets
than ever before.
Afghanistan and the opium
runs poisoned Americans.
>> What if I told you I had
the cure for the opioid crisis
in my hand?
>> It's not new.
It's not synthetic.
>> Kratom represents a great
starting point for developing
new, safer pain relievers.
>> It's a plant that helps
people overcome opiate
addiction.
>> We are kratom.
>> What do you guys
hope comes out of this?
>> That I get to keep
kratom in my life,
because it saved my life.
>> I'm just tired of pain.
>> Brigitte, you've
seen this documentary.
What is your take on this from
an herbalist's perspective?
>> Well, not only have
I seen the documentary,
but I've also spoken to a number
of people who are finding that
kratom is an
alternative to them.
Many people did not start out
wanting to become addicted.
They were given prescriptions
for pain pills because
of an accident or injury.
And their bodies got
very dependent on it.
And yes, the opioid
crisis is very real.
I don't know how many
people are dying every day,
but it is an epidemic.
And I'm not saying that kratom
is the answer to everything.
I think that we need to do
what we can to relieve pain,
whether it be through
chiropractic or osteopathic
work, yoga, Rohlfing,
massage, eating
an anti-inflammatory diet.
But I also think that
we need to relieve pain.
And sometimes it's
going to take relieving
that pain for a
person to even be
able to get motivated
to go to a class
or find a health professional
they can work with.
So kratom is an herb.
It is helping a lot of
people to relieve pain,
to relieve inflammation.
And I think that some people
are going to get relief from it.
They are telling me that
it's working for them.
I've tried it a few times.
It seems to be very relaxing.
And I think that it needs to
be available for people that
are going to be helped by this.
It doesn't grow in this
country, at least not yet.
It grows in the tropics.
And there's different
qualities of it.
But we need to address this.
And taking another
pharmaceutical
isn't going to be the answer.
>> So this is an attempt to
stop the runaway train while
we're figuring out how to
ground ourselves enough to begin
a process of rehabilitation
on every level that caused
the addictions in
the first place.
What pros and cons
exist with this plant?
>> Well, there have been
a few deaths or overdoses.
However, there's a lot of deaths
and overdoses from opiates.
So I think if people have good
intentions and are not using,
and they're using this instead--
but who's to say when
people are on dozens
of prescription drugs.
We're not going to stay
on this planet forever.
So if it gives
people an opportunity
to take charge of their health
and find ways of getting
some relief, absolutely.
I believe that we should
have access to all plants.
All of them have some virtue.
Even poison ivy is
used in homeopathy.
So it takes understanding,
and knowledge, and research.
And that's why there's
herbalists on the planet,
to help people
figure it all out.
>> Do you suppose it poses a
threat to the pharmaceutical
industry, being a natural plant?
>> Oh, absolutely, absolutely.
And if we were to go
back to the year 1900,
most pharmaceuticals
were made from plants.
And as more and more
products became synthesized
or we extracted
what was believed
to be the active
ingredient, we started
developing all of these drugs.
But we're also finding
out that a lot of drugs
have side effects and that
maybe we were better off
using the whole plant.
Again, the dandelion
is as diuretic-- is
as effective as one of the
leading diuretic drugs.
And diuretics deplete
the body of potassium,
but dandelions
give you potassium.
But who's going to do millions
of dollars of research
on something that's a weed
in people's backyards?
>> It's so obvious.
It's right under our nose.
And we miss it because we're in
our heads, too sophisticated,
having a better idea than what
nature had to provide us, yeah.
So you write in your book about
these potentially addictive
substances that get set
into motion in our lives
that originally were only
used for ceremonial purposes.
Can you speak to the
difference in usage
that way versus what has
happened in our culture that
is possibly leading
to an overuse
or an addictive
perspective on them?
>> Well, we often think,
well, tobacco has been smoked
by the Native Americans.
Or we could say that alcohol
is a natural substance.
But a lot of these
substances, originally they
were used on occasion,
and as you said,
for ceremony, for celebration.
I think there's a big difference
between a toast to life
or in celebration than
polishing off a bottle of vodka
by yourself.
>> [LAUGHING]
Ceremony of another sort.
>> Yes.
And so there's a
fine line sometimes.
Are we celebrating
every day, all day long?
Is it undermining our health?
But many of these things
were used on occasion
to celebrate a reunion, a
gathering, a birth, a baptism,
a job celebration.
And so when they
started becoming used
without any intention--
so I really like
the idea of whatever
it is you're going to
use, to have an intention.
Is this the right
time to use it?
Just because a
substance is available,
it doesn't mean
it's the right time.
But I do see that we've gone--
even coffee originally was used
to stay up all night and pray
by some of the early
mullahs in the Arab culture.
>> It certainly has taken on a
different route in our culture
now, as has tobacco.
So cigarette addiction
is a worldwide issue--
specific herbs to help
with nicotine addiction?
>> So I used to be a smoker.
Deep breathing
exercises, we talked
about inhaling through
a cinnamon stick,
but also chewing
on licorice roots.
Eating sunflower
seeds in the shell
gives you something to do
with your hands and mouth.
That's another good one.
One of the specific
essential oils to smell
is black pepper
because it smells
the most like an ashtray.
And so rather than having
a cigarette, you just--
[INHALING] take some
deep inhalations.
But again, making a
list of all the reasons
why you want to quit
might be helpful.
I did mention lobelia.
Chewing five juniper berries
a day is another folk remedy
to break up the deposits of
tar and nicotine in our lungs
and doing a few saunas when
you get to the point like, OK,
I'm giving it up.
You want to do things to help
break up that congestion.
>> How does this lobelia
work, regarding the nicotine?
>> Well, it has an alkaloid
in it called lobeline,
which is very similar to
the structure of nicotine.
And so when lobeline is--
or lobelia, the whole herb,
is ingested, the body
feels like, well, I'm
getting that fix.
But yet, the lobelia
is not habit forming
using just such a small amount.
I also want to say that people
smoked throughout history
many, many different plants.
Somehow we latched
on to tobacco,
but people have smoked mint,
and rose petals, and damiana,
and mullein.
Mullein actually used
to be recommended.
>> And cloves.
>> Yeah, cloves.
Most of the world's
production of cloves
goes into clove
cigarettes, which
might not be such a
good idea because they
are somewhat anesthetic.
So you tend to
inhale more deeply.
But there's been many herbs.
Mullein used to be recommended
for asthma patients
as a bronchial dilator and
an anti-inflammatory agent.
Again, I'm not trying
to encourage people
to start smoking things, but
we made them more concentrated,
more addicting.
We increased the
content of nicotine
that was in there originally.
We boosted that.
>> Yes.
I really appreciate
what you're saying
about the more concentrated
it becomes, the more likely
it is to be an addictive
substance because it
becomes more stimulatory.
And we're trying to
back it out and use
the whole plant, the whole food,
so that the system can remain
harmonious and can even utilize
it as an adaptogen kind of way,
taking from it what it needs
and discarding the rest,
but not having to overstimulate.
Can you talk about nutritional
therapy for anxiety?
>> Well, anxiety seems
very prevalent right now.
And it's been found that
when people have low blood
sugar, where maybe
they've skipped meals
or they just had something sweet
or stimulating for breakfast
and lunch, low blood
sugar might make one more
prone to having a panic attack.
We also know that
when we feel anxious,
we might be breathing
very shallowly or rapidly.
So really quick
thing to do, just
start taking some deep
inhalations of lavender.
Have some snacks with you.
I like to travel
with some Brazil nuts
because they're high in
protein and good quality fats.
And just eating three or four
of them can be very grounding.
So sometimes having
some snacks with you
can keep you from
making a poor decision
and buying something
from a vending machine
that's not going to help you.
There's also a wonderful
little substance
I'm sure you and
many of our viewers
are familiar with called Rescue
Remedy, one of the Bach flower
remedies, which is like a
little miracle in a bottle.
You take two drops under your
tongue, and all of a sudden you
just feel calmer and better
able to deal with the situation.
And of course,
sugar and caffeine
are the enemies of addiction.
They tend to promote
those feelings.
But I even think things like
music that's overly fast--
when the music is
really fast, it
can overtake our
physiological functions
and make our hearts beat faster.
So anything we can do
to feel more grounded--
the sound of running
water, like having
a waterfall in your
space, or maybe
essential oils at
your fingertips,
and breathing more deeply.
Colors can affect us.
Wearing blue and green
are calming colors,
whereas red might be a
good color for when you
want to have more motivation.
>> What about supplemental
therapy in addition to any
of this?
>> Well, I always think
food first and herbs second,
but there are some supplements
that would be good to consider
if someone is dealing
with addiction.
And a calcium
magnesium supplement
can help calm the
nervous system.
That's pretty simple.
A B vitamin complex is going
to help us to have more energy
and to feel more serene.
I think of GTF chromium.
The GTF stands for
glucose tolerance factor,
can help keep our blood
sugar levels stable.
So that can be a
really good one.
Some people might find
fish oils to be of benefit.
There's also vegan sources of
omega-3's, like eating chia
seeds, or walnuts, or even
superfoods like spirulina.
So those are some of the main
things that I would think of.
And then there's even more
high tech supplements.
A lot of them are
described in my book,
"Addiction-Free Naturally."
But you could consult
with a practitioner
and see if maybe GABA or
5-HTP would be helpful.
But I also think it's good
if you go see a practitioner.
Bring all the
supplements, and drugs,
and vitamins that
you're already using
because there are some things
that might be contraindicated.
If someone's on
antidepressants, you might not
want to add certain herbs.
So it's really good,
whatever health practitioner
you go see, to let them know
the whole plethora of things
that you might be using.
>> I hope people are taking
notes because you are
a plethora of information.
And please let us know where
people can find you to learn
more about what you're sharing.
>> Thank you so much.
You can find me at
brigittemars.com.
I have a phone app
called iPlant that has
all kinds of plant information.
I have 14 books.
And today, we're talking about
"Addiction-Free Naturally."
And I have a YouTube station.
So there, check it out.
Thank you so much.
>> Absolutely.
We have only
scratched the surface
on what herbs and
plants can do for us.
And you, obviously, are
living what you're sharing.
And that is of great value to
me and I know to the viewers
as well.
When you said you were with 50
years experience, I'm thinking,
now she doesn't look
like she's old enough
to have 50 years of experience.
So obviously, you're walking
your talk and a living example
of what this can be for us.
So thank you so much.
>> Thank you.
I'm honored.
Many blessings to you
and all our listeners.
>> Yes, wonderful.
You don't have to break
the bank to break free
from addiction and dependence.
You can do so naturally.
If you are making that
first step in your journey
to recovery, it is still
important to consult a health
care professional, of course.
Even if you don't suffer
from an addiction,
we can apply what we've
learned here today to detox,
curb cravings, and improve
our overall health.
I'm Dr. Sue Morter.
And thank you for
watching "Healing Matrix."
[MUSIC PLAYING]